---
title: "Stroop Effect"
date: 2017-10-26
tags: [Inferential Statistics, Statistics]
header:
  image: "/images/Stroop/stroopeffect.jpg"
excerpt: "Test a perceptual phenomenon using inferential statistics: In this project, I investigate a classic phenomenon from experimental psychology called the Stroop Effect. I create a hypothesis regarding the outcome of the task, then look at some data collected from others who have performed the same task and compute some statistics describing the results. Finally, I interpret the results in terms of the hypotheses."
mathjax: "true"
---

### Overview
In this project, I investigate a classic phenomenon from experimental psychology called the Stroop Effect. I create a hypothesis regarding the outcome of the task, then look at some data collected from others who have performed the same task and compute some statistics describing the results. Finally, I interpret the results in terms of the hypotheses.

### Experiment Setup
In a Stroop task, participants are presented with a list of words, with each word displayed in a color of ink. The participant’s task is to say out loud the color of the ink in which the word is printed. The task has two conditions: a congruent words condition, and an incongruent words condition. In the congruent words condition, the words being displayed are color words whose names match the colors in which they are printed. In the incongruent words condition, the words displayed are color words whose names do not match the colors in which they are printed. In each case, we measure the time it takes to name the ink colors in equally-sized lists. Each participant will go through and record a time from each condition.

### [Data](https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B9Yf01UaIbUgQXpYb2NhZ29yX1U/view)

### Analysis

#### Identify variables
* Independent variable – Congruent (c) / Incongruent (i)
* Dependent variable – Time recorded to read the words

#### Hypothesis
* Ηο: μ1 = μ2 (The difference between the population mean time to read congruent and incongruent words is NOT statistically significant)
* Η1: μ1 ≠ μ2 (The difference between the population mean time to read congruent and incongruent words is statistically significant)
* Dependent t-test for paired samples, two-tailed:
+ One dependent variable which is of the type ratio (ranks with equal intervals and an absolute 0)
+ One categorical variable with two related groups (same participants tested more than once)
* t-test because: The sample size is less than 30 and the σ of the entire population is unknown.
* Two-tailed because: I want to be sensitive to the difference in either direction (positive or negative)
* Assumptions
+ Differences between the scores of the two populations is approximately normal
+ Sample data can estimate population variances
+ Population variances are approximately equal

#### Descriptive Statistics:
Sample Measure	Congruent	Incongruent
Mean	14.05113	22.01591667
Median	14.3565	21.0175
STD Dev	3.559358	4.797057122

4.	Distribution:
a.	Histogram - Neither distribution is completely normal


b.	Box plot – There seem to be outliers in the incongruent data set



5.	Result:
a.	t(23) = 8.02, p = .05, two-tailed
i.	t-stat = (mean(a) - mean(b)) / (standard_deviation(a - b)/square_root(N))
ii.	SE = standard_deviation(a-b)/sqrt N = 4.86/sqrt(24) = .992
iii.	t-stat = 7.96/.992 = 8.02
b.	Confidence level is 95% (p = .05)
c.	Critical t-score (p = .05, df = 23, two tailed): 2.069
d.	Reject Null Hypothesis: Since the t-score is higher than the critical value, the difference is statistically significant
e.	Conclusion: By looking at the sample data we can infer that for the population the average time for reading the colors of incongruent words is higher than the average time for reading the colors of congruent words.
6.	Explanation for stroop affect*
a.	Speed of Processing Theory: the interference occurs because words are read faster than colors are named, which could be because of different parts of brain processing the information
b.	We are depending on speech to understand if we have identified the color. Speech might be more closely associated with text rather than color. So we might be identifying both simultaneously, but are only able to say text faster.
c.	Alternate tasks:
i.	Turn the words upside down or rotate them 90 degrees.
ii.	Compare long words to short words.
iii.	Color only half of the word or color only the first and last letter of each word.

*Source - https://faculty.washington.edu/chudler/words.html


### Insights:
1. Around 55% of the total contribution to the database came from the top 10 users
2. Around 17% of the users are one time contributors
3. The metro extract for Nashville includes several surrounding cities and not just the Nashville metro
4. Surprised to learn that graveyard is the number 1 amenity!
5. In the top 10 sources of data we see a public and private partnership.
  a. Public : (Tiger which is part of the US Dept of Commerce, tdot - tennessee dept of transportation, USGS - US Board of Geographic Names)
  b. Private : Yahoo, Bing

### Suggested improvements data collection:

If we don't want to depend on private companies to have streetmap data, it is essential to educate and incentivize people to contribute data to an open source public platform like openstreetmaps. One way to do it would be to partner with public schools and teach high school students the importance of openstreetmaps and teach them how to contribute to the openstreetmaps. It could be one of their assignments.

**Benefits**: This will encourage a discussion among the students and their families about the importance of publicly owned street data. Some of the students might go on to become life long contributors. A lot of additional data can be captured if this can be done in schools across states.

**Challenges**: It would be hard for the openstreet community to convince the public schools to include openstreetmaps contribution as an assignment in their course work. It would also be challenging to get students interested about contributing to openstreetmaps. But if done, this can really help in improving data in openstreetmaps while allowing students contribute to the community.

### Project Link: [Open Street Maps Nashville](https://github.com/FK85/open-street-maps-nashville)
